=head1 NAME

ena.pl - Create and manage projects in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

ena.pl [ACTION] [umbrella|project] [OPTIONS]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This script is used to create, modify, and manage projects in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA). It also supports various actions such as ADD, MODIFY, CANCEL, SUPPRESS, KILL, HOLD, RELEASE, ROLLBACK, VALIDATE, and RECEIPT on any object.

=head1 ACTIONS

The following actions are supported (case independent):

=over 4

=item B<SHOW>

Show the XML code for a project. Note: Related projects cannot be retrieved from the API.

=item B<ADD>

Add a new project.

=item B<MODIFY>

Modify an existing project.

=item B<CANCEL>

Cancel a project.

=item B<KILL>

Kill a project.

=item B<HOLD>

Hold a project until a specified date.

=item B<RELEASE>

Release a project or any object.

=item B<ROLLBACK>

Rollback a project.

=item B<VALIDATE>

TODO: Validate a project. Not supported yet.

=item B<RECEIPT>

Receive a receipt of the project submission.

=item B<HAP2_UMBRELLA>

Create a new umbrella project for a HAP2 (alternate haplotype) project, based on an existing HAP1 project. This action duplicates the HAP1 project as a HAP2 project, creates an umbrella project, and links both HAP1 and HAP2 projects under the new umbrella.

=item B<EBP-NOR_UMBRELLA>

Create a new umbrella project for the EBP-Norway initiative, based on an existing HAP1 project. This action works like HAP2_UMBRELLA, but applies EBP-Norway-specific defaults for title, description, and master umbrella linkage.


=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--alias> I<ALIAS>

Specify the alias for the project.

=item B<--description> I<DESCRIPTION>

Provide a description for the project.

=item B<--title> I<TITLE>

Specify the title of the project.

=item B<--username> I<USERNAME>

Provide the username for authentication.

=item B<--password> I<PASSWORD>

Provide the password for authentication.

=item B<--locustagprefix> I<LOCUSTAGPREFIX>

Specify the locus tag prefix (only supported on production system).

=item B<--center> I<CENTER>

Specify the center name. Defaults to 'EBP Norway'.

=item B<--releasedate> I<RELEASEDATE>

Specify the release date for the project. (Format YYYY-MM-DD) Default: TODAY

=item B<--children> I<CHILDREN>

Specify the children projects, separated by commas.

=item B<--receipt> I<RECEIPT>

Save the receipt to a file.

=item B<--accession> I<ACCESSION>

Specify the accession for the project.

=item B<--master_umbrella> I<MASTER_UMBRELLA>

Specify the accession of a master umbrella project to which the new umbrella project should be linked. This option is used with the HAP2_UMBRELLA and EBP-NOR_UMBRELLA actions to create hierarchical umbrella project relationships.

=item B<--keeptemp>

Keep temporary XML control files.

=item B<--production>

Run the script on the production system. By default the test system is used

=item B<--verbose>

Enable verbose output. IF not verbose, only the acession of an successfuly created project will be printed to STDOUT.

=item B<--help>

Print this help message.

=back

=head1 DETAILS

This script provides simplyfied commandline client to the ENA Project and object API.

It allows to create umbrella projects and allows to link submission projects to an umbrella. 
Note, that there is no client-side sanity checking. All error checking is done on the ENA side. 
It is not possible to turn a submission project into an umbrella project and vice-versa. 
Some changes may not be reversible, e.g.child projects cannot be unlinked from an umbrella without contacting support and published projects cannot be unpublished.

Unless verbose is activated, the script will only print the accession of a successfully created project to STDOUT. INFO and ERROR messages are printed on STDERR.

The script exits with code 0 if the operation was succesful, 1 otherwise. 

Projects can be identified by either their alias or accession. When creating a new project, a unique alias must be provided.

The HAP2_UMBRELLA and EBP-NOR_UMBRELLA action in this script are designed to facilitate the creation of a new umbrella project for a HAP2 (alternate haplotype) project, using an existing HAP1 project as a template. When you use this action, the script performs several steps automatically:

Duplicate the HAP1 Project: It copies the metadata from the specified HAP1 project (such as title, description, alias, and locus tag), modifies relevant fields to indicate that this is a HAP2 (alternate haplotype) project, and creates a new HAP2 project in ENA.

Create an Umbrella Project: It then creates a new umbrella project, using the species name as part of the alias and title, and links both the original HAP1 and the new HAP2 projects under this umbrella.

Link Projects: The script ensures that both the HAP1 and HAP2 projects are registered as children of the new umbrella project, establishing a clear relationship between them in ENA.
This action streamlines the process of managing alternate haplotype assemblies by automating the duplication, creation, and linking steps, reducing manual effort and minimizing the risk of errors.

When passing description and title to the HAP2_UMBRELLA action, placeholders like @SPECIES@ and @COMMON_NAME@ can be used. 
The script will replace these placeholders with the actual species name and common name derived from the HAP1 project title. 
We assume that the HAP1 project title is formatted as "Genus species (common name)", 
where "Genus species" is the scientific name of the species and "common name" is the common name in parentheses.
This ensures that the umbrella project is correctly named and described based on the species being studied.

When using the EBP-NOR_UMBRELLA action, the script applies specific defaults for the EBP-Norway initiative, 
such as setting the title and description to include the species name and linking to a master umbrella project (PRJEB65317).


=head1 DEPENDENCIES
This script requires the following Perl modules:

=over 4

=item L<Getopt::Long>

=item L<LWP::UserAgent>

=item L<HTTP::Request::Common>

=item L<MIME::Base64>

=item L<Pod::Usage>

=item L<POSIX>

=item L<XML::Simple>

=item L<File::Temp>

=back

=head1 LIMITATIONS

This script does not currently support submitting or retrieving raw project data from ENA.
It is primarily focused on creating and modifying projects and umbrella projects.
It does not include sample or run submission functionality at this time.

=head1 BUGS AND ISSUES
Please report any bugs or issues to the author or maintainers of this script.


=head1 EXAMPLES

=over 4

=item B<Add a new project>

  ena.pl ADD project --alias "project_alias" --description "Project description" --title "Project Title" \
  --username "your_username" --password "your_password"

=item B<Modify an existing project>

  ena.pl MODIFY project --alias "project_alias" --description "Updated description" --title "Updated Title"\
   --username "your_username" --password "your_password" --accession "accession_number"

=item B<Add projects to an umbrella project>

   ena.pl MODIFY umbrella --accession "umbrella_project_accession" --description "Umbrella Project Description" \
   --title "Umbrella Project Title" --username "your_username" --password "your_password" \
   --children "child_project_accession_1,child_project_accession_2"

=item B<Release any ENA object with an accession and show XML request>

   ena.pl RELEASE object --accession ERZXXXXXXX  --username user --pass "pass" -prod --verbose --releasedate 2024-12-01

=item B<Create a new umbrella project for a HAP2 project>
  ena.pl HAP2_UMBRELLA umbrella --accession "HAP1_project_accession" --username "your_username" --password "your_password" \
  --title "@SPECIES@ Umbrella Project" --description "This is an umbrella project for @SPECIES@" \
  --master_umbrella "PRJEB65317"

=item B<Create a new umbrella project for EBP-Norway>
  ena.pl EBP-NOR_UMBRELLA umbrella --accession "HAP1_project_accession" --username "your_username" --password "your_password" 
  



=back

=head1 TODO

=over 4

=item B<There is no option to retrieve project data yet.>

=item B<Include some internal validation>

=item B<Include sample and run submission?>

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Michael Dondrup (michael.dondrup < at > uib.no)

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE


BSD 2-Clause License

Copyright (c) 2024, Michael Dondrup

All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

=over 4

=item 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.


=cut

